![](images/nunnery.jpg)

* * *

# A Sacrilegious Startup Community

### Taxiwise is the proof in the pudding

* * *

Before working at [my current startup](http://www.intentmedia.com/) ([one of
the best places to work in New York
City!](http://www.crainsnewyork.com/gallery/20131206/FEATURES/120909999/58)),
I spent a few years working in [a startup community on the other side of the
planet](http://www.startupshk.com/), Hong Kong. I had come to Hong Kong direct
from the Valley with very little understanding of what the move would mean for
me professionally. What I found was a small but vibrant community of people
trying to build technology and businesses in the midst of an otherwise very
conservative and traditional city.

I hadn’t had reason to really blog about that experience, until recently, when
two big and related events occurred.

## Startup Sacrilege

The first big event was the release of [Paul
Orlando](http://startupsunplugged.com/)’s first book, [Startup
Sacrilege](https://leanpub.com/StartupSacrilege). This book was really
fascinating for me to read, because it was the distillation of a number of
discussions I remember from the Hong Kong startup community. But rather than
being specifically about building a startup in a small urban Asian city,
Paul’s book is really about building startups whenever you’re not some hot
Y-combinator graduate in the Valley. It’s for the 99%, if you will.

So much of what he has to say is familiar to me, because, beyond being my
downstairs neighbor, Paul was very much a member of the startup community in
Hong Kong. The number of companies and individuals he worked with in his time
in Hong Kong is really mind-boggling. Looking back at [his farewell
presentation](http://www.slideshare.net/porlando/farewell-hong-kong-startups)
writing this, I was struck again by how much one person contributed in so
little time.

## Taxiwise

The other event was far more unexpected and, in a way, far more important:
[Taxiwise](http://www.taxiwise.co/) [got acquired](http://www.techinasia.com
/hong-kong-taxi-booking-startup-taxiwise-gets-acquired/). For folks outside of
the HK tech community, I can’t convey how big of a deal this is. Why? Taxiwise
is evidence that success is attainable in HK.

## Acceleration

Specifically, Taxiwise is very much the product of some concerted efforts to
build the Hong Kong startup community and have it produce real businesses. The
guys came to Hong Kong from the Bay area to join Paul’s first startup
bootcamp, Startups Unplugged. Their business evolved as did the community
efforts to serve companies like theirs, so when they finished with Startups
Unplugged, they went on to Hong Kong’s first startup accelerator,
[AcceleratorHK](http://acceleratorhk.com/), founded by Paul and the
incomparable [Steven Forte](http://www.stephenforte.net/default.aspx). Steve
deserves a post all his own, but he didn’t just write a book, so that will
have to wait.

The bootcamp and accelerator programs generated a ton of excitement in Hong
Kong. They really helped bring the community together around the concerted
effort to build companies that might someday become real, profitable
businesses. With the Taxiwise acquisition, I think that it’s clear to everyone
now that it is very much achievable within the constraints of HK. What I think
Paul’s book makes clear is that success is achievable anywhere.

## Sacrilege Dissected

I do very much think that, if you found this post at all interesting, you owe
it to yourself to spend some time reading Paul’s book and thinking it through.
That said, I want to call out a couple of his points that I think were crucial
in the positive impact he and Steve’s programs had on the Hong Kong tech
community, and on the success of Taxiwise, in particular.

### Skip the startup entertainment; talk your customers instead.

This is such a basic point that unfortunately requires reiteration in so many
contexts. Reading about cool startups is not building a business. Going to
pitch events and mingling with other startups in not building a business.
Anything that’s not creating your product or going out and getting customers
is not building a business.

I think that the startup entertainment industry is a huge sinkhole for people
interested in startups, especially those working outside of the Valley. Thanks
to the magic of the internet, all of these things feel so real and close, when
they’re really, at best, just porn.

As Paul mentions in the book, the Taxiwise guys absolutely pulled away from
their Twitter feeds and engaged with the real problems of transportation in
Hong Kong.

### Build your community; don’t chase celebrities.

This is a more constructive extension of the previous point. There’s no point
in trying to get Brian Chesky, Dave McClure, or whoever to show up to your big
event. If they’re not staying, they’re not building. You may get a ton of
people to show up to the event and people sticking around until the bars close
afterwards, but then what?

The people who help your community build towards being successful are already
a part of your community. They live there, they care about what’s going on,
and they’re the resources you need to be drawing upon.

In the case of Taxiwise, that meant specifically people like [Felix
Lam](http://redchapeladvisors.com/), who has a deep and legitimate tie to the
Hong Kong tech community. He also had the capital, connections, and experience
to help Taxiwise get to where they are today. Investors like that are superior
to big names from the Valley, because they can and will contribute to the
success of startups in your city.

* * *

## Community matters

I wanted to tell this story, because I wanted to share this very clear object
lesson in the power of building a community. Clearly, the success of Taxiwise
is one with many fathers. I say this not to take anything away from the work
that the Taxiwise guys put in; they totally did the work. Rather, I want to
highlight the developments in the HK startup community that led to their
success and should lead to more startup in HK succeeding, thanks to the way
that the community has developed to grow such companies.

I’ve had beers with basically everyone in this story, and if you flew out to
Hong Kong tomorrow, you could as well. The door is wide open for people to
join in, engage, and build. That’s exactly what a startup community should
look like.

Now, with Paul and Steve taking their efforts to other locations, I’m excited
to see how Hong Kong continues to grow and evolve with a different set of
players. I’m also looking forward to seeing other cities try the approaches
that Paul outlines in his book. In particular, I think his ideas around
different kinds of accelerators could have a huge impact in a modern economy
that is daily growing more short-sighted and harsh. Communities can achieve
great things, when they are united around a common goal. When they focus on
being the best they can be and not some imitation San Francisco, anything is
possible.
