## Defining tractability

#### What the Tractable Constraints collection is all about

The Lone Tenement by George Bellows

* * *

If you’ve come across this collection, you’re probably wondering if it’s worth
your time to read or follow. If you write stories on Medium, you might also be
wondering if this is a collection that you’d like to contribute to. Let me
offer this basic FAQ to help you out.

### What sort of stories are here already?

I’m a software developer who has spent most of my adult life working on
startups in cities I felt passionately about. So when I brought my writing to
Medium, I found that I wanted to write stories about:

  * [Startup communities and how successes really do have many fathers](https://medium.com/@jeffksmithjr/a-sacrilegious-startup-community-1a44bb7924bd)
  * [How technologists should view their role within society](https://medium.com/@jeffksmithjr/programming-with-purpose-40bf118a2845)
  * [What young companies can learn from scrappy artists](https://medium.com/@jeffksmithjr/new-work-new-york-4a9aabecb0b0)
  * [Why free and open societies really are for everyone](https://medium.com/tractable-constraints/free-to-be-1e549cd94f97)

### What sort of stories belong here?

Thus far this collection has been focused on:

> approaches to the problems of living a productive and principled life in a
modern urban setting

To me that certainly encompasses topics like building technology companies,
but much more. I think so many discussions of technology and technology
companies miss the forest for the trees precisely because they ignore the
communities in which technology comes out of and _should_ serve.

I’m keeping the focus intentionally broad with the caveat that I think that
stories about the here and now should take precedence. Life in a modern city,
surrounded by technology, where everyone is trying to invent the future is
startling and overwhelming. This unique moment in time is endlessly
fascinating to me, and I hope it is for you to.

If hard-pressed, I’d call out one more preference: for the first-hand. We
experience so much of life through TV, Facebook, and blog posts. I think that
all of these are a part of where ideas come from and where debate occurs. But,
in the terms of the pig and the chicken at breakfast, I’m inclined to prefer
the beast who is committed, not just involved.

### Why does this collection exist?

With [all](https://medium.com/@Medium/the-future-of-collections-79e6ea385113)
[of the](https://medium.com/@Medium/the-future-of-collections-79e6ea385113)
[changes](https://medium.com/the-story/collection-changes-part-3-d234638b3577)
in the structure of Medium collections, it became obvious to me that if I
wanted to engage in shaping the voice of any of the communities on Medium, I
had to lay claim to my own. The reality of the new submission process is that
it’s going to be harder to make connections via Medium that you haven’t
already made via Twitter or Facebook. I think that the Medium community has
been excitingly vibrant and open up until this point, and I’m personally
willing to put in more work to see that it stays that way.
