## The Difficulty of Degrees

I want to talk about the not-so-
standard undergrad degree in CS. But don't run away just yet!

> This is not another post about impostor syndrome.

Instead I want to talk about how gaps in our education can make for real gaps
in our skills.

### dancing in the dark

With apologies to the Boss, here's my view on the road to becoming a software
dev, that doesn't route through a BS in CS.

#### you can't start a fire without a spark

I'd say that this path is typified by a lot of the same stuff that causes
people to take a more accepted route into software. It comes down to being
amazed enough by some feat of technology to learn it inside out, for sheer
enjoyment. With that, often comes a love of tinkering, a desire to build
something new, and a special sort of tunnel vision that can only come from
passion.

#### this gun's for hire

Of course, the other dimension of this archetypical dev is that he's already
writing code for a living, without all of the benefits of an undergrad in CS.
All of the good qualities in the above description have led him to develop
sufficient skills to say, pay rent from his code.

#### even if we're just dancing in the dark

Here's the part I've been building up to. Just coding is totally a legitimate
route toward becoming a competent and productive developer. But it is super
prone to all sorts of issues.

Consider the following semi-fictitious characters.

  * Joey Java Dev-He knows quite a bit about how to build huge, sprawling enterprise Java apps…and nothing about anything else. Is his code super stateful? You bet. Would it be possible to introduce any concurrency into his code without a massive, ground-up rewrite? Not a chance. He knows _one_ language, and it's object-oriented and imperative, but he only knows what one of those terms means.
  * Bam Bam Sysadmin-He can reduce any problem to a series of BASH scripts. Are these scripts unreadable? Well, they're BASH. Does his output add to or reduce technical debt? Ummmm…a single change in an environment variable might require a month of testing, or prayer. Sure, he's doing his best to keep the lights on, but if any of his severs ever go dark, they might stay that way, forever.
  * Jay Query-Do I even need to describe this guy? He learned the absolute bare minimum of front end JS and has been struggling to stay above water ever since.
  * Sally Subversion-She's heard that some people don't like SVN, but she always assumed that it was because they couldn't afford it.
  * Bobby Baseless-He knows that the data goes somewhere after he gets it from the user. To a server somewhere, maybe? And he needs to get the data from somewhere. But that somewhere is just a product, right? Like SQLServer or Oracle or something. Didn't we already set all that up? What's left to do?

Remember, though, these lost souls aren't sitting on the corner with a sign
saying "Will code for food". They're gainfully employed wreaking havoc in
somebody's codebase. This isn't impostor syndrome; these guys are just bad at
their chosen professions.

#### there's a joke here somewhere and it's on me

I don't want to be a dick about any of these guys; that's why they're
archetypes. In real life, they're people, usually people with normal,
reasonable motivations, like feeding their families. But I think it's obvious
that the person who spent some time formally studying CS is way more likely to
avoid the real limitations of our dancers in the dark.

Personally, I spent the better part of a decade employed in software without a
formal CS qualification of any kind. Obviously, I don't think that everyone
without a CS degree is a complete clown. But I do think that filling the holes
that the degree-less route can leave is a real challenge. I'll have to leave
talking about the challenges of that task in another post, though. It's tough,
but never say programmers don't love a challenge. After all, people used to
write Assembly, I hear. ;)
