## Engineering your own education

#### The journey of a lifetime

* * *

One of the fun parts of being on [a rocket ship of a
startup](http://www.intentmedia.com/) is that I get to spend some of my time
recruiting. I know that not every engineer enjoys recruiting, but personally,
I really love it. When I recruit for Intent Media, I’m helping to introduce
some smart motivated people to awesome jobs where they will have every chance
to succeed in their professional goals and have a great time along the way.
It’s sort of like being Santa Claus for good engineers.

One of the most salient aspects of recruiting for me is the difference between
people working in data science and engineering and those looking to get
started in the field. I got my first job in a data science group back in 2008,
before there was a lot of clarity around this emerging profession. When I was
at Perlegen, our next door neighbors and softball rivals LinkedIn were doing a
lot to clarify these concepts, but it was clear even in the biotech world that
sure were a lot of important jobs having to do with data that required
different sorts of engineers than had been involved in the past.

Now, when I talk to young mathematically inclined people who can write some
code, they all want to talk about data science. Recent grads with degrees in
things like electrical engineering, physics, and biomedical engineering are
all rushing to brand themselves as data scientists. I understand the desire,
but I often have to hold myself back from getting all Lloyd Bentsen on them.

<http://youtu.be/O-7gpgXNWYI>

I understand the young technical person’s desire to align themselves with a
hot profession, overflowing with good paying jobs. As a strategy it makes
sense, but young engineers can fail to appreciate the negatives such an
approach has.

> What I want to know most when I meet a young engineer is not **what they
know**; it’s **what they’ll learn** in the first year that I work with them.

So when a twenty-two year old physics grad tells me that he has a strong
background in data science, I get quite concerned about where he sits on [the
Dunning-Kruger
curve](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect). It’s okay
to [know that you know nothing](https://medium.com/@sachagreif/i-know-nothing-
13002f986567). If I’m considering working with you, I’d prefer that you know
that you know you know nothing. It’s cool. I know that I also know nothing,
but with a bit of luck and strategy, we might find a way to implement the next
feature story in our backlog. We just need to make sure that a little thing
like hubris doesn’t get in the way of learning the things we need to know to
solve the real world problems in front of us.

### Learning how to learn



I enjoy it when a junior engineer asks what they should learn to get a job in
data science and engineering. It shows that they appreciate that there is more
to be learned. But I would love to be asked _how_ they should learn those
things.

Even though no one asked, I’m going to tell you anyway. This is not another
post on, [“What does a data scientist
do?”](http://blog.revolutionanalytics.com/2013/03/what-does-a-data-scientist-
do.html) Those resources are out there. I’m going to assume you can Google as
well as me.

Instead, I want to focus on the lifelong process of becoming a better
engineer. Because I work on fun big data stuff, that certainly influences my
perspective and what people want to talk to me about. But I think these tools
and techniques apply equally to all kinds of engineers, including those oh, so
sexy data scientists. They’re engineers too.

#### The Old (and New) School

You can’t talk about learning and software qualifications without wading into
the contentious territory of whether or not programmers need a CS degree. This
is a complicated issue that some people have very strong opinions on. I’ve
blogged about it in the past, and I would encourage you to [read that
post](http://toromon.com/degrees.html).

To summarize my views on formal CS education, I’d say that it’s great
preparation if you can get it. Of course, I worked for a fair bit in software
without having a degree in CS, so I don’t think that it’s mandatory to have
the qualification. But it should be mandatory to have the knowledge, at least
some of it. When I worked in software without a formal qualification, I was
useful because I had still learned all sorts of things about software.

How did I learn those things? In my case, I learned mostly from books and
practice. When I did finally decide to get a CS degree, it was in large part
to signal to employers that I had in fact read those books and practiced the
material in them. If I had to sum this up in a nice prescriptive bullet point
it would be something like this:

> ProTip: If you can’t get a degree in CS, at least read the textbooks and do
the work. That will give you most of the benefit of formal CS education.

Of course, the 2014 version of this advice has to acknowledge that if you can
do that, then you can probably do a bunch of MOOCs.
[Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/), [Udacity](https://www.udacity.com/),
[edX](https://www.edx.org/), and all the other MOOC providers offer world
class education for little to no money at any pace (I prefer to watch lectures
at 2X, personally). There’s nothing stopping you from getting just as good at
programming and statistics as the best and brightest from Stanford and MIT.

I started taking MOOCs during that first experimental session taught by Thrun,
Norvig, Ng, and Widom at Stanford. While I was traveling across Indonesia for
a month, I was also traveling through the inner depths of databases, guided by
[Jennifer Widom](http://cs.stanford.edu/people/widom/).

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*JOAuRXm2zcaPG5KxHpXDtg.jpe
g)

For various reasons, it was one of the best courses that I’ve ever taken in
any topic. If you haven’t taken it, [you
should](https://class.stanford.edu/courses/DB/2014/SelfPaced/about),
especially if you’re interested in data science or engineering. Much of what
data engineers do is to solve the old problems of databases at a new scale.
Having a solid foundation in databases ends up being useful nearly every day
of your working life.

More generally, if you’re an ambitious engineer, who wants to do great things
in tech, I have a hard time taking you seriously if you don’t take advantage
of world-class resources like MOOCs. Lots of us come from modest backgrounds
that didn’t necessarily give us much of a chance to go to a place like
Stanford. But now that Stanford is just giving away their education, you need
to step up to the plate, if you have big data dreams.

#### Learning on the clock

I think that most smart junior engineers have an appreciation for the material
in the previous section. Most promising candidates I meet understand that they
need to be as best prepared as they can be to snag a fun, challenging tech
job. The point I see many miss though, is that their tech job is the beginning
of the next phase of education, not the end of their education.

One of the most important things a professor ever said to me was the
following.



> Everything that I’m going to teach you in this class was invented after I
left school.

Photo from Bradley University

* * *

The professor was [Dennis Kroll](http://www.bradley.edu/academic/departments/i
met/faculty/profile.dot?id=134658) and the topic of the course was Java
development (that thing I now do for a living). His point was about the
duration of our educational journey as engineers. If we wanted to stay useful
and relevant as engineers, we were going to have continually find ways to
learn more, throughout our professional careers.

If that sounds unreasonably challenging, I have good news for you: we have the
tools to make this easy. Working in an exciting technology company involves
all sorts of learning as an embedded part of the work.

For example, at [Intent Media](http://www.intentmedia.com/), within the past
year we’ve had study groups of various sorts around [TDD](http://www.growing-
object-oriented-software.com/), management, [QA](http://lisacrispin.com/agile-
testing-book-is-now-out/), and [functional
programming](https://www.coursera.org/course/progfun). If you’re a student
getting bored and exhausted with tedious homework, this might sound like a
negative to you, studying more once you already have a job. It’s actually a
huge benefit. These sorts of opportunities give you a chance to continue to
get getter at the things you do and the things you _want_ to do in the future,
guided and supported by the people who know your work the best, your
coworkers.

I would be lying if I said that every company offered you the same level of
opportunity to learn and grow. I’ve been at a bunch of great tech and biotech
startups, filled with smart, motivated people who wanted to continue growing
and learning for the rest of their lives. Not every place is like that. In my
one tenure at a Fortune 500 company, the environment was so unstimulating and
unsupportive that I ended up learning bioinformatics at night, mostly out of
frustration and boredom.

That was a younger me. I like to think that a more mature me would have could
have found a better way to engage my colleagues in developing a more learning
culture at work. Since that time, I’ve been entirely in the startup world.
Startups can be incredible places to learn, when built properly.

Beyond simple things like study groups, startups can be places where people
experiment with and rapidly adopt new techniques that are going to allow you
to develop and grow as an engineer more effectively. I’m think of things like
[agile squads](http://techcrunch.com/2012/11/17/heres-how-spotify-scales-up-
and-stays-agile-it-runs-squads-like-lean-startups/) (which we just adopted at
IM) to organize the teams and [lean coffee](http://leancoffee.org/) to run
meetings. These are techniques which will have an explicit impact on how well
you are supported and guided to become a better engineer. The more
hierarchical and bureaucratic organizational techniques common at larger
companies can actively prevent an engineer from learning and growing. Startups
can offer a stark contrast to those sorts environments.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*aIiSQPmHLNdHUs5eQK7Bjw.jpe
g)

Photo from Intent Media

Another great technique that a company can use is pair programming. If you’ve
never tried it, pair programming might sound scary and invasive. It’s not. In
fact, pair programming is one of the best tools that an organization can use
to ensure that all of its engineers are growing and learning. When you pair
program, you as a junior engineer are directly in the code learning from a
more senior engineer how they write good code. The examples could not be less
abstract; you learn from implementing your actual work. This is miles away
from the frustrating artificiality of school homework.

But pair programming at its best is not just a one way street. It’s a great
way for everyone to learn from everyone else. Even if your more advanced code
knowledge is limited to the 10 lines of Java you wrote yesterday, that’s still
10 line of code that I know nothing about, and if I’m on your team, I want to
learn what you know about it.

As a cultural practice, pair programming promotes a more egalitarian
environment where it’s explicitly recognized that all engineers have knowledge
to share and deserve to the opportunity to learn from each other. On the data
engineering squad that I work on, we’ve formalized this with this saying:

> We are all teachers and students.

By which we mean that we should all be humble enough to learn from each other.

Fundamentally, many of these practices come from valuing equality. Obviously,
equality is a value that has huge impact [at the broader social
level](https://medium.com/tractable-constraints/free-to-be-1e549cd94f97), but
I think that it’s also a fundamental part of the connection between how we
work and how we live. I believe that the tech professionals who agree that
[unconferences are the best way to learn from each other](https://medium.com
/tractable-constraints/many-voices-equally-heard-ab7feb615808) are the same
sort of people who are going to [fight for a more democratic
society](https://medium.com/tractable-constraints/many-voices-equally-heard-
ab7feb615808).

This applies the same at the team level. As I talked about in [this
post](https://medium.com/data-engineering/a-cladistics-of-mistakes-
64f528d945a7) and my recent talk at [CITCON](http://citconf.com/), data
engineering teams need to ensure that all team members have a shared
understanding of the problem, the application, the techniques, the failure
modes, etc. One of the obvious first steps for a team looking to build
reliable machine learning software is to ensure that everyone has some basic
level of education in what machine learning is and how it works.

When I worked for [AI pioneer Ben
Goertzel](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ben_Goertzel), he never hesitated to
teach new hires concepts as basic as the difference between precision and
accuracy. If he has the time to teach new members of his team, then I think
that all senior engineers or data scientists should have the time to ensure
that their team members know what they need to know to be able to make
valuable contributions. Training team members so that they understand the
problem domain should be a given.

And, of course, teaching a topic is also one of the best ways to learn a
topic. So, as a junior engineer grows into a senior engineer, they may find
themselves switching formal roles from student to teacher, but they should
still be learning through teaching. One of my primary motivations in [starting
up blogging again](http://toromon.com/static-blogging-so-far.html) was to do
[a bit of teaching](http://toromon.com/category/computer-science.html) as part
of my personal educational activities.

### Learning how to choose

I hope all of the above material is useful to the junior engineer looking to
understand how they develop the skills to get a good tech job. I understand
that it can be hard. Despite the enormous shortage of software engineers, it
can still be quite difficult to find the right job when you’re just starting
out.

The well prepared software engineer is likely to have a wealth of choices,
though.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*TajtSGjcRLWPjGckMBcf8A.jpe
g)

Even in that situation, it can be hard to understand the basis for which you
should choose Company A over Company B. Given how important learning and
growth are to your future as an engineer, I’d strongly encourage you to think
about how you’re going to grow before _and after_ you get that first exciting
tech job. It’s been my experience that startups offer great environments to
learn and grow as an engineer. If you asked me to recommend just one company,
I think it’s clear [whom I would recommend](http://grnh.se/leksx3).

But regardless of if you come to work with me, I think that you should work at
some place that values your lifelong development into a better technical
professional. My best advice on how to get into such a place is to start
thinking and acting in terms of that scale: your entire working life as an
engineer (even if you wind up in management someday).

You owe it yourself and everyone who helped you get this far to never stop
learning. The journey of becoming a better engineer is never ending but never
disappointing, either.
