# Free to be

### Why LGBT pride is for everyone

* * *

As the night closes on New York’s[ ](http://www.nycpride.org/events)Pride[
](http://www.nycpride.org/events)activities, I’m thinking about why I’m so
happy to walk downstairs right into a giant raucous LGBT pride event. It seems
strange, right? Bookish programmers like me usually hate that sort of noise
and chaos, but [NYC Pride](http://www.nycpride.org/) is different for me. When
I hear the roar of that crowd, my heart swells up like the Grinch’s at the end
of the Christmas special, breaking right out of its box.

Why does pride make me feel this way? In a word: **freedom**.

* * *

I’m not gay. I feel incredibly silly bothering to even call that out in a post
like this. It seems so fundamentally unnecessary. Who cares whom I love? As it
happens, I love a woman. But that’s a detail, a deeply unimportant one, in my
opinion.

What I do think is important is freedom. Among others, I think that the
freedom to be different is very important.

## Free to be me



I care about being free to be different for lots of reasons. One is that I am
a bit different. In no particular order, I’m a vegan, a hacker, an atheist, an
introvert, and a sometimes ex-pat. Depending on context, those things may or
may not be the norm. Rarely will they all be. So for purely selfish reasons, I
care a lot about how much affinity is required for a person to have access to
those things that lead to opportunity. Given that it’s what I spend my time
on, I care a lot about how different people can be and still pursue a career
in tech and startups.

### Being different in tech

Within the context of tech and startups, the issue of affinity bias is a very
big deal. If you haven’t already, you should totally read Carlos Bueno’s
[recent post](http://carlos.bueno.org/2014/06/mirrortocracy.html) on tech
hiring. So much of this post resonated strongly with me. This is the real
social dynamic lying underneath the sunny marketing of the startup world.

If you buy into Bueno’s argument, then you can’t help but fear that technology
and the tech industry run a real risk of creating a new aristocracy (well
Mirrortocracy, specifically). I’m proud to work at [a
place](http://www.intentmedia.com/) that actively tries to help kids get on
the road to a career in tech. The role that the tech industry plays in making
our society a better or worse place is [an issue I care a lot
about](https://medium.com/@jeffksmithjr/programming-with-purpose-
40bf118a2845). But these sorts of discussions on the internet can only do so
much. The internet is a fun place, but it’s not a real place. You can’t
actually live there. [His
solutions](http://carlos.bueno.org/2014/06/refactoring.html) are great
suggestions, but I feel like we’re really just at the beginning of this
conversation amongst the tech community.

### Being different in New York

* * *

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/2000/1*2kdD0p_vqSr6QOpCzEif0Q.jp
eg)

When I see New Yorkers of all shapes and sizes coming out to march the streets
in support of living differently, I see a city that has few of the problems of
the tech industry. The city may have its problems, but insularity is not one
of them. That alone is perhaps the best reason I can think of to do tech in
New York. In this city, people from around the world come here for all sorts
of reasons, not just because they’re really good at [reversing a singly-linked
list](http://www.programmerinterview.com/index.php/data-structures/reverse-a
-linked-list/) in C++. And the really crazy thing is that, when we all get
here, we still find a way to get along and make our differences add up to more
than the sum of their parts.

This can be a hard concept to convey to people who have never spent time in
New York, just how meaningfully diverse the self-selecting group of people who
live here are and how that leads to wonderfully creative, motivated people
doing all sorts of things you would never see anywhere else. To put in nerdy
terms, I feel like New York is the meatspace version of the utopia that the
internet was supposed to be but rarely was: a place where all people were
welcome to be themselves and build their dreams. It fulfills that promise so
much more than San Francisco, with its unaffordable housing and vestigial
public transit, will ever be able to. If I had to pick just one example of the
magic of New York diversity, I’d point to [the contribution that the theater
community makes](https://medium.com/@jeffksmithjr/new-work-new-york-
4a9aabecb0b0) to the soul of the city. But that’s far from the only one I
could choose. I firmly believe that better cities make for better people and
better societies.

* * *

_Photo by James Nova __<https://www.flickr.com/photos/j-no/>_

## Free to be alive

When watching [The Internet’s Own Boy](http://www.takepart.com/internets-own-
boy), the documentary about Aaron Swartz, I found myself struck by first, how
happy this guy made me be to a programmer and then, how sad his story made me
to be an American voter. His story is incredible and painfully tragic. He
believed in a world where everyone should have free and open access to all of
the achievements of humanity and did much in his too-short life to making that
a reality. But he was met with suspicion and hostility by bureaucrats,
lawyers, and cops because they didn’t understand what he was trying to do for
humanity.

Aaron Swartz made the world more open for everyone to communicate and learn
from each other, but in a sense, he died from lack of a supportive community.
It seems crazy that such a famous, successful man could feel so isolated and
powerless as to kill himself. Yet that’s just what happened. I can’t help but
view his death as a failure of the larger American community to be a more open
place to debate important issues, intelligently and peacefully.

### Losing the different ones

The LGBT community has had more than its fair share of losses. Many of the
more tragic ones are stories much like Aaron Swartz’s: people who felt
outmatched by a world that didn’t agree with them. The decades-long AIDS
epidemic has taken so many people from the world, from Freddie Mercury to
Alvin Ailey and on down the too-long list. Yet somehow, through this horrific
and inexplicable plague, the LGBT community has grown stronger, more
organized, and has literally changed the world for the better.

My own personal viewpoint into this momentous period in history is colored by
my memory of the loved one that I lost to AIDS when I was still a kid. It
seemed so strange and arbitrary to me that my uncle should be sick, with this
disease that seemed to want to only kill gay men. Why would anything want to
make men like him sick? He was interesting and funny. He’d given me some of
the best books that I’d ever read. Why him?

Years later, after a graduate degree in biotechnology, I came to understand
the deep improbability of HIV and the sense in which the LGBT community was
simply horribly unlucky. But at the time, it seemed so specifically cruel,
like a raincloud over one man, pouring on him until he finally drowned.

Yet, like the larger LGBT community itself, my uncle was given an opportunity
to rise above his unfair circumstances. In his case, this meant educating kids
on safe sex and AIDS in midwestern schools. I don’t think many of the kids he
talked to had likely ever met anyone who had stood up and said, “I have AIDS.”
Those conservative communities were not home to a lot of people who wanted to
have frank and open discussions about sex and sexuality, and I think he did a
lot to help those he could reach in the time that he had. It couldn’t have
been easy to share his tragic mistakes as a cautionary lesson to children, but
he did it anyway.

There is a part of me that feels that it is horribly unfair that he got so
little of the life he should have had. But I am also forever grateful that he
got the chance to leave his message behind in the hearts of young people who
would live on after he passed.

## Free to be whomever

I can only view the world through the lens of my own life. I’m a startup tech
guy, a (new) New Yorker, and the nephew of a tragically lost uncle. From where
I sit, we are all better off in a world where we can all feel free to be
whomever we wish to be. When I see the LGBT Pride parade taking over my block,
I see people celebrating hard-won freedoms, and that makes me happy. I want my
city, my industry, my entire world to be free and open for all types of people
to live the lives of their choosing.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/600/1*Vk6cek_pt3MOnekRd17Fyg.jpe
g)

Photo by gigi_nyc <https://www.flickr.com/photos/76807015@N03/>

If you like your like your sleep anything like I do, you might bristle at
being woken up at 2AM by people shouting and celebrating. You might even be
tempted to call the cops, but don’t do it. Just remember: they’re celebrating
**freedom**.
