# Many Voices, Equally Heard

### What I learned about democracy at unconferences in Hong Kong











_Photo from BarCampHK_

* * *

This year I returned to the US after living and working for a few years in
Hong Kong. With all of the turmoil going on back there recently, I’ve been
thinking a lot about the place, my time there, and the people I know who are
still there. In my time in HK, I met a ton of interesting people and had all
sorts of meaningful, legitimately life-changing experiences, so it’s hard to
talk about that time in my life in any way that actually sums things up in any
useful way. Instead of talking about [that whole period](https://medium.com
/tractable-constraints/a-sacrilegious-startup-community-1a44bb7924bd), I want
to talk about just three days during those years: the days that I went to
BarcampHK.

## My Camp Experience

One of the most impactful experiences of my time in Hong Kong was attending my
first [BarCamp](http://barcamp.org/w/page/402984/FrontPage). If you’re not
familiar with the concept, BarCamps evolved out of [Foo
Camps](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foo_Camp). They’re unconferences where
everyone is expected to participate and engage. There is no rigid separation
between organizers and attendees, speakers and listeners, the invited and the
drop-ins. In principle, everyone should play a role in making the event
successful, and ideally, each person should play several different roles over
the course of the event.

[Ben Crox](https://twitter.com/bencrox) and his fellow organizers consistently
tried to create an environment where people could and would take up all of the
opportunity of the format. If you went to one, it was almost impossible to not
be offered the chance to do some job to make things better. You could talk.
You could put up signs to hard to find rooms. You could distribute t-shirts.

One of my favorite examples was when some people realized that they had lucky
draw (read: raffle) prizes but no way of randomly selecting winners. A lamer
group of people would have just started tearing paper into scraps and thrown
them into a box. The Hong Kong BarCampers went well beyond that minimum viable
solution to something far more fun. In a small fraction of a day, one attendee
grabbed a list of all of the attendees and hacked up a script that randomly
cycled through all of the names, showing each attendee and then randomly
stopping on the winner. It was a huge hit and a perfect example of why people
went to BarCamp: this was where all of the people who actually did stuff were.

### Talk it up

One of my favorite uses of BarCamp was to try out talks that wouldn’t have
made sense in another context. The wide latitude allowed by the unconference
format let me feel more comfortable with giving talks that were narrower,
rawer, or just shorter than I would otherwise bother to do.

While in the midst of a fairly short consulting project involving the
development of monitoring systems for a distributed network of embedded sensor
devices, I decided to extract out my research and prototype work into a more
general overview of the state of open source monitoring tools.

<http://www.slideshare.net/jsmith54/save-the-server-save-the-world>

As a talk, it didn’t break any new ground, but it turned out to be a great way
to open up a dialogue with a bunch of other people interested in related
operations issues that I wouldn’t have known how to reach another way.

Energized by the warm reception that talk received, I quickly pulled together
another talk in a couple of hours for an afternoon session of lightning talks.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*7Ri5DMA0BlpPU6q0cAVTpg.jpe
g)

Selling HK tech folks on open source monitoring tools. Photo from CoCoon.

This one was on an even more fringe topic: [ion-sensitive field effect
transistors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISFET). In a way, this talk was one
of the most personal ones I had ever given up until that point in time,
because it got it discussed how the radical idea of getting microchips wet and
throwing them away after a single use led to [one of the most successful
technology organizations](http://www.genomeweb.com/sequencing/life-
technologies-acquire-ion-torrent-725m) I’ve ever had the privilege to be a
part of. Unsurprisingly, this talk led to a lot of great conversations about
bleeding edge biomedical technology, startup successes, and the possibilities
for fundamental innovations in Hong Kong.

At my third BarCamp HK, I was deep into some [academic research into uncertain
data management](http://toromon.com/category/computer-science.html), so I was
not feeling so flush with time to have a well prepared talk on another topic.
But I had noticed one weird issue with discussing my research with pretty much
anyone: whenever I would discuss column or column-family oriented databases,
people would get confused. Even very knowledgeable people about databases
would say things that were provably untrue, just because the terminology
obscured some fairly straightforward but powerful CS concepts. Engaged by the
chance to obsess over some obscure distinction for half an hour in front of an
audience, I whipped up this tongue-in-cheek take on the topic:

<http://www.slideshare.net/jsmith54/breadth-or-depth-whats-in-a-columnstore>

By that point in time, I knew that if I came with something to share the other
BarCampers would come ready and willing to engage. In the talk, in the
hallways, at lunch-throughout the event everyone was talking about ideas in an
unpretentious, open, and collaborative fashion. My silly little talk about
databases was what I had to share, but I was continually pleasantly surprised
by what others brought to the table. A great example was my friend [Paul
Orlando](http://startupsunplugged.com/)’s turn as the Cantonese MC in
partnership with a HK-local’s English language emceeing. It was a vivid way of
demonstrating that everyone at BarCamp was interested in meeting everyone else
there halfway, if it made for a better dialogue.

### Why BarCampHK mattered

Obviously I had a good time at BarCamp in Hong Kong, but it may not be
apparent why these events are worthy of discussion. I’m sure that they sound
like decent, normal meetups to your average SF or NYC developer. In Hong Kong,
a big part of why events like this mattered were the traditional hierarchical
structure of everyday life, especially work life. Contrary to hip bay area
startups practicing [holacracy](https://medium.com/about-holacracy), the vast
majority of organizations I encountered in Hong Kong (and greater China, in
general) were still very traditionally hierarchical and rigid. People would
often joke that everyone in Hong Kong worked for one of two or three families.
When a typhoon was coming but didn’t hit until the weekend, they would joke
that it was being repelled by [the Li Kai Shing force
field](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Li%27s_field).

When the average citizen assigns god-like powers to bosses, you must be in a
place with some very extreme organizational dynamics. Sadly, that was largely
my experience in nearly every company I encountered in Hong Kong. The boss was
a sort of god and, often enough, a fickle and cruel one. So it took huge balls
for a guy like [Steven Mak](https://twitter.com/stevenmak) to get up and
discuss the concept of a bossless company.

<http://www.slideshare.net/tcmak/bossless-companies>

Unique events like BarCamp offered people who were working for change a venue
to bring up what wasn’t being discussed elsewhere. At the unconference where
we all decided on the day of what we wanted to talk about and who wanted to
listen to, discussions like this could be had, if we wanted to have them. When
you ask people to vote with their feet, it can be surprising and encouraging
to see just what people really vote for.

## A Democratic Hong Kong

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*Ud_xwPCCLOAzL-
luMHUKlQ.jpeg)

Photo by Billy McCord

The above picture is from my old neighborhood, Admiralty, taken a few days ago
by a friend of mine. When I lived in Admiralty, it was a reasonably quiet
place to hang out on the weekends. Mostly consisting of office and government
buildings, you could stroll around on a Sunday and the biggest crowds you
would find were the off-duty Phillipino maids practicing dance routines in the
public spaces.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/600/1*WEy0crDEH6cC96PBPhGwyQ.jpe
g)

Asia Society Hong Kong

The Admiralty of my memory is the home of the stunning and historic Asia
Society, the former site of the British Explosive Magazine. That building is a
fascinating and beautiful example of effective adaptive reuse in a country
that has been slow to learn the value of the discipline. Built on the site of
a former occupying military force the locals and interested international non-
profits have turned it into a space that celebrates the remaining bits of
historical structures and unspoiled wilderness in the midst of a thronging
commercial area, more broadly known for the fantastically expensive [Pacific
Place mall](http://www.pacificplace.com.hk/).

But of course, Admiralty is more than that. It’s also home to the main centers
of Hong Kong governmental power.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*1Gtxf1UDS8-PjKiSKatlUQ.jpe
g)

The Legislative Council

This building and the blander one to the right of this picture are the current
focus of the protesters attention. While the legislative council (pictured
above) is largely fairly, democratically elected, the neighboring Chief
Executive has never been.

Legislators in Hong Kong take a strange and very specific pride in exactly who
their constituents are. Some of this comes from the somewhat unusual practice
of having legislators represent individual professions and sectors, rather
than just geographies.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*l5YlJoU3DkbBX4ef5ba8cQ.jpe
g)

Art representing the people of Hong Kong in the Legislative Council Building

But now we get to the heart of the matter: who does the Chief Executive
represent? For some time now, the conclusion has been Beijing. Not long after
he was elected, Hong Kong IKEAs sold out of stuffed wolves, because they could
be used as a form of profane political speech in opposition to Leung Chung-
Yin.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/600/1*u7gzsgQcjjQ7LSg_EsVkIw.jpe
g)

Photo from IKEA

The Lufsig protests were hilarious and wonderfully creative. The “joke” is a
bit of a vulgar Cantonese wordplay that is far beyond my limited Chinese
knowledge, but the continual linguistic ingenuity of the nation is obvious,
even if you don’t know much Cantonese. You only have to look to the flocks of
mainland tourists eagerly incorporating the slang from HK television and film
into Mandarin. My personal favorite aspect of the whole wolf episode is that
even protests in Hong Kong centered around the national pastime: shopping. So
meta and so brilliant.

* * *

Now things have gone well beyond stuffed wolves, though. Last I heard, they’re
no longer making the train stop by my old home, to make it harder for people
to get to the throngs of protestors outside of the government buildings in the
north of Admiralty. Were I still in Hong Kong today, it would be a tough day
to walk my dog to the waterfront, and I think that we would see very few
dancing maids. On one level, it’s sad that things have to be more serious now.

But don’t mistake me, I think that the protests are the last reasonable option
available to the people of Hong Kong. They were promised fair, open,
democratic elections, and they have not been given them. The absurdity of this
refusal is mind-boggling. In the 155 years of British occupation, Hong Kong
grew up from nothing to one of the most prosperous, productive, safe, and fair
societies in Asia. During that same period, mainland China has struggled to
pull its billion people out of poverty and into the modern age, to build a
society where problems are solved with debate and not with tanks, and to feed
the hungry and not succumb to political and economic fantasies. Mainland China
has come a long way since Deng Xiaoping built on top of the rubble of Mao, but
it has little to teach Hong Kong about how it should be ruled. Much the
reverse is true.

> The Hong Kong that I know is more than capable of effectively ruling itself.

Its people are educated, thoughtful, and capable of productive democratic
debate. Its approach to many complex and difficult social issues is world
class. For example, I would say that it handles financial crimes, public
housing, and eminent domain in ways that are largely superior to the analogous
approaches in the States. The time for full, direct elections has long-since
arrived. Beijing needs to recognize that giving Hong Kong the freedom it
deserves is the only long-term solution to the present difficulties.

## Democracy is an unconference

Despite what the above section might imply, I’m not a very political guy. I
spend most of my time focused on the microcosms of tech startups and [big
data](https://medium.com/data-engineering). Most of the political issues that
I’m concerned with have to do with the politics of 50 person companies that
don’t yet make a profit. I’m able to spend much of my time with such a narrow
focus, because, in spite of its issues, the US is a reasonably fair and
democratic society. I care a lot about how we ensure that [all of our citizens
enjoy the same amount of freedom](https://medium.com/tractable-constraints
/free-to-be-1e549cd94f97), but my average day is spent in a world where people
have a lot of freedom to speak and be heard, compete and succeed. That’s not
to say that the US political system leaves me without concerns. For example,
we need to address the huge problem of institutionalized corruption and get
money out of politics. But we’re also engaged in very public debates on just
that, and [you can join in right now](https://mayday.us/), if you agree.

What I’m saying is that the American system, in its broad strokes and ideals,
is a tremendously equitable way of giving as many people as possible a voice
in the important issues that affect them. As an American from birth, I know
and appreciate the utility of true democracy, and I think that every citizen
of the world has a right to what it offers.

Closer to day-to-day life, I have a pretty detailed knowledge of how and why
the principles of democracy make for better tech companies and startups. Of
course, when you have a room full of smart, motivated, self-selected people,
the sum is going to be more than the sum of its parts. Giving each one of
those people effective tools for positively influencing the course of the
company is simply good business. Approachs like holacracy and agile squads are
good tools to enable that sort of equitable environment.

I’ve chosen to work at [a startup](http://www.intentmedia.com/) that mirrors a
lot of those values, and it absolutely leads to success. If I had to sum up
our founding business model, I’d put it something like this:

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*qWFd_cePbO8x9TtfQktRYA.jpe
g)

Image from South Park. Sorta.

If this sounds implausible to you, I would encourage you to come on by, [apply
for a job](http://grnh.se/leksx3), play with [one of our awesome
dogs](http://youtu.be/fdvQxNbw4wE), and learn why the above is a totally valid
business plan. Engaging in a free and open debate about the issues that face
your technology and company is an absolutely critical practice in the
development of a successful technology startup, IMHO.

### Unconferencing

If you’re in tech and you’ve not experienced the free and open debate that
I’ve talked about before then I have some very specific suggestions for you:

  * First, you can come check out [CITCON in Austin](http://citconf.com/austin2014/). It’s an Open Spaces-style unconference focused on continuous integration, testing, and more generally all of the real world stuff involved in _actually_ getting software to customers, sponsored by [Intent Media](http://www.intentmedia.com/). Structurally, it’s very similar to BarCamps as I’ve described them. It’s run in part by one of the most decent technology leaders I’ve ever met, [my colleague Paul Julius](http://www.pauljulius.com/). As a founding principle, CITCONs are always free, but if you make it down, I bet that you’ll find it a far more worthwhile experience than your average expensive tech conference.
  * Similarly, if you’re interested in the same idea in an Asian setting, [CITCON will be coming to Hong Kong](http://citconf.com/hongkong2014/) in November. I’m optimistic that the Hong Kong tech community will join in and make the most of the event.
  * Finally, of course, right after CITCON Hong Kong, [BarCamp Hong Kong](http://www.eventbrite.com/e/barcamp-hong-kong-2014-tickets-12967936447) is happening again. If it’s not clear from the above, I couldn’t recommend these events more. I love how fully the community engages in the BarCamps, and if you can make it out, I think you will as well.

## Conclusion

I don’t know what the future holds for the government of Hong Kong. The latest
news is that the protestors might be going home but that nothing has been
solved. While I’m certainly interested to see how this issue evolves, it’s
fair to say that, in the bacon and eggs breakfast classification system, I’m
the chicken in this situation; I’m involved but not committed. I could hop on
a Cathay flight back, scan my thumb and walk back into my old temporary home
country, but I’m not going to.

![](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/1*C2eQjTV6AuZ7QCHV0W4aTA.jpe
g)

Photo by Billy McCord

Thinking globally and acting locally, I can only focus on those actions that I
can take in my own life, which is largely taken up with the goings on of data,
tech, and startups in New York. So, I’ll be at my startup, at meetups around
the city, and at CITCON, trying to figure out how I can make my small worlds
fairer, more democratic places. If you happen to see me at any of those
places, I’d love to chat about this stuff. If we’re only going to interact on
this strange place we call the internet, then please [hit me up on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/jeffksmithjr) with your thoughts. Big cities like
Hong Kong and New York can be loud messy places, much like the internet
itself, but I firmly believe that when we engage in a vigorous debate as a
community we are all better off with the choices that come out of all of us
deciding together.
