-# Where we live and work

#  New York Tech: the Review

In the spirit of [my previous review](http://toromon.com/buffering.html) of
[Buffer](http://bufferapp.com/), I thought that I'd try to do a review of New
York tech. Absurd, I know. But let's do it anyway.

## our protagonist

So, for the purpose of this story, I'm going to be the viewpoint character.
Who am I? [24601](http://youtu.be/HPIos2mXbUE) ! Sorry, force of habit.

Well, at a zeroth level,

> I'm just another bearded vegetarian in skinny jeans who needs to get a
goddamn job.

Specifically, I'm a dev. With some fairly real world data science/machine
learning experience. I've been lucky enough to work with some very smart
people, but I'm really just a hacker with good taste and a lot of persistence,
at heart.

## the setting

For more background, not too long ago, I returned from hacking on some
seriously hairy problems in Hong Kong, to come back to the States. I've spent
the vast majority of my career working for startups, but I'm now senior enough
to be shooting for a role with some real opportunity for impact at a place
with a strong team and a real chance of success.

## the city

The word around town from my buddy [Anthony](http://www.hulu.com/watch/550570)
is that NYC tech is hot. Like super, super hawt. From your
[MangoDBs](http://www.mongodb.com/) to your
[Fumblrs](https://www.tumblr.com/), the city is full of fruit and football
companies. Hmmmmmâ€¦

Seriously, the number of exciting companies in NYC is really awesome. People
like to point to thinks like Google and Facebook having big offices out here
as a sign that the city has somehow "arrived". I think this does short shrift
to hugely innovative companies like Bloomberg that came well before the
current trend. The fact is that NYC has been doing the important stuff in the
American economy for a long, long time.

The upside of that is that this latest tech boom has gotten to take advantage
of there already being a world class city here full of everything it takes to
have the life and career of your dreams.

### the hoods

A lot of people talk about Union Square as being the hub of tech in the city,
giving it the title of Silicon Alley. This is true enough to a point. There
are plenty of tech companies in the neighborhood. But of course, Chelsea is
just next door, and the boundaries between the two can seem a bit arbitrary,
with tech companies in both.

Further to the south, SoHo is still going strong too, with some serious
advantages, like less tourists and cooler lofts. It's also more convenient to
walk to if you live in the village.

Some people will make a big deal about Brooklyn being where the real, exciting
tech startups are at, but I'd say nope, [hipster
nonsense](http://www.tumblr.com/tagged/hipster-nonsense).

**update**: after posting this originally I found this awesome [map](http://wearemadeinny.com/find-a-job/) which makes it far more straightforward to empirically assess my more qualitative impressions about the distribution of activity in the city.

## stack 'em up

How about tech stacks? Is every on living on the bleeding edge, running the
nightly builds of the latest libraries in production? Well, there is some very
cool stuff in use, but don't think that it's all Haskell and Julia. Java is
still as huge here as everywhere else. Real companies, even real startup
companies are using lots of mainstream things like Python, Ruby, and even
_shudder_, BASH.

But there's tons of considered experimentation going on. Scala has seemingly
been at least considered everywhere. People are doing cool things in Go and
Clojure. Moreover, there's a ton of work going on in the so-called big data
technologies and piece them together into something that makes money today.
People are using Scalding, Storm, Cascalog, Spark, and so on to solve problems
in their actual businesses. It's not just Hadoopy things. There's some very
cool work being done with queueing technologies and of course, NoSQL is
everywhere. Polyglot persistence is de rigeur, and I like it.

## demand

Whoa buddy, does [New York need
devs](http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/mars_needs_moms/)! I mean, the community
here is great and huge, but the appetite for more engineering talent is
substantial and insatiable. Basically nobody I talked to in my epic job search
was looking for just a single role. Essentially everybody who is hiring is
hiring for at least one more of whatever they currently have, if not one more
whole team. Of course, the challenge then becomes finding the right people.

## supply

I really have no view into who else is looking for jobs in NYC right now. My
feeling is that good organizations are having a seriously tough time finding
people as good as they already have and are choosing to sit on their open
reqs, instead of bringing in the wrong people. That's probably wise, but I
think that there may be a bit of a logical inconsistency in this attitude.

Here's my proposition:

> If everyone's hiring for the same guy and can't find him, then he might not
exist.

What do I mean by that? Well, there seems to be a ton of companies looking for
devs who can write high quality code, know enough math to understand
analytical problems, have experience and interest in distributed systems, etc.
Whether it's framed in the context of big data, quant development, data
science, or machine learning, it still seems to boil down to the same set of
core skills. But if you simply count up the number of open reqs and look
around, the math doesn't seem to work out. There's just no sign that anywhere
near the number of people being hired for actually exist. So those "open" reqs
are really aspirational reqs in my opinion. Many of them don't look like
they're ever getting filled.

## my job and yours

In the end, I did find a great job at a [great
company](http://www.intentmedia.com/) (that you should totally check out,
because, you know, we're awesome and we're hiring). It was a lot of work to
get my head around the situation and make a considered choice. Now that I
have, I'm super relieved to be done, excited about the opportunity, and
humbled to be working in such an awesome city full of great engineers and
great companies.
