## New Work, New York

#### What tech startups can learn from theater

* * *

One of the best parts of living in New York is being in the midst of so many
other things beyond just tech. As [Twanna A.
Hines](https://twitter.com/funkybrownchick) put it:

> Reason to Love New York #1,134,795 — Subway platforms contain more talent
than some entire cities

It’s ridiculous and oh so true. New York is bubbling over with people
imagining, building, and creating the new. Don’t get me wrong: [Maker
Faire](http://makerfaire.com/) in San Francisco is a blast, but making is a
24-7, contact sport here.

Of course, software is one of the latest things that they’ve really gotten
into making in the city, but I think it’s pretty clear that they’re going to
kick ass at it. One of the city’s obvious massive strengths is the rich
community of folks already here working on amazing creative things. The sort
of innovation that comes from truly radical thinking is _de rigeur_ around
these parts. So, if you’ll bear with me, I’d like to talk a bit about theater
before getting back to my usual bailiwick, tech startups.

### Immersive Theatre

Problem/Solution is a recently premiered immersive theatre production.
Conceptually similar to the tremendously successful [Sleep No
More](http://sleepnomorenyc.com/#listen), the show welcomes the audience into
a “museum of problems” where the traditional boundaries between audience and
performers are thoroughly blurred. While there are some places to sit, most of
the time audience members wander about engaging with various scenes, dances,
and other harder to describe experiences.

https://plus.google.com/u/0/photos/101699523801561290811/albums/60169911985374
92273

One of the most fascinating aspects of the production for me personally was
the emergent consequences of radical free will in a theatrical context. Just
like in real life, you _can_ miss out on things in Problem/Solution. Were you
interested in the scene about skin, beauty, and the magical powers of [Lush
cosmetics](http://www.lush.com/)? Then you probably missed the masked dance on
the other side of the space. When a character asks you to join them in a toast
you can or you can abstain. As the evening comes to a close you may have been
touched by a stranger, have been covered in paint, have joined in a dance, or-
most interestingly of all-have done none of these things, choosing to decline
each offer to engage in the performance.

### Sea Songs

Song of the Sea is a pair of thematically-related shows, SIRENS and The Girl
From Bare Cove, both largely written by the somewhat startlingly talented
[Jillie Mae Eddy](http://jilliemae.com/) and performed together in a single
evening. The first is described as a “sideshow symphony”, while the second is
called a “folk opera”. In a sense, both are somewhat traditionally structured
musical theater productions, but the experience of seeing them has little in
common with grabbing a performance of, say, Wicked.

In these emotionally fraught, at times, deeply disturbing productions, the
performers are clearly not striving to leave you at a safe, comfortable
distance from the problems on stage. The intimate staging and direct
interaction between the performers and the audience leave you feeling
complicit in the crimes occurring just a few feet away. Similar to
Problem/Solution, the show literally begins before it formally begins, with
the characters establishing a relationship with audience members before the
nominal start of the show.

http://jilliemaeeddy.bandcamp.com/album/the-bare-cove-demos

A powerful consequence of the human scale venue is the removal of the need for
amplification except when dramatically useful. This is used perhaps most
successfully when Eddy takes over the sonic volume of the space with her huge
voice. Her all-to0-real cries for help are as unsettling as they should be,
not just because of Eddy’s personal history with sexual violence. When the
other performers join her in the more uplifting moments of the shows, you
cannot help but be carried along on the waves of their support. It’s a
powerful reminder of the dynamic range possible with an ensemble of voices-
utterly unlike the vast majority of pre-packaged pop.

### Learnable Startup Lessons

Viewing independent productions like these can be an amazingly educational
experience for the sufficiently open-minded startupper. There is a very real
sense in which each artist and artistic production is a sort of startup, born
with no inherited resources, needing to justify its own existence to see the
light of day. In many ways, the struggles of creating art make the work of
making software look like a walk in the park. Brilliant artists can still be
nearly starving while the makers of [basically useless apps get
acquihired](http://www.crunchbase.com/organization/summly) every week. In
greater challenges, greater lessons can be learned.

#### Do the difficult with friends

In talking with the performers behind Problem/Solution, they talked about the
importance of being friends before putting together the show. This is far from
uncommon in artistic circles, but it is often discounted in tech circles.
Instead, we buy into capitalist fantasies like [founder
matchmaking](http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/226729) services and events.
Bullshit, I say. Do you think Larry and Sergey would have accomplished half as
much if they had been strangers only just met via some third party? When you
see performers who are totally comfortable with each other, it resonates in a
way that the simulacrum of familiarity simply can’t. The great breadth of
experiences available to audiences of Problem/Solution would not be possible
had the creators not felt comfortable bringing their own separate, distinct
experiences to the production. The most successful startups have many fathers;
even that crank Paul Graham
[agrees](http://www.paulgraham.com/startupmistakes.html).

#### Be some place, not every place

Both of the pieces in Song of the Sea have a strong northeastern flavor to
them, each with a well-founded and meaningful sense of place to them. While
the world of SIRENS is solidly fantastical, it is a very near fantasy world,
the freak show at Coney Island. The New York-based performers have all likely
been there, and [Coney Island beer](http://coneyislandbeer.com/) was a
sponsor, serving at the show.

It reminded me of my experiences in startups outside of San Francisco, where
people built things for people in places that they were only imagining. Often
these “startups” were little more than sad, little cargo cults. Paul Orlando
has a head-shaking summary of these behaviors [on
TNW](http://thenextweb.com/entrepreneur/2014/05/16/trying-copy-tech-hubs-
worst-thing-small-startup-communities-can/).

Contrast this with Problem/Solution, which was inspired by and produced
specifically for the space at [WOW Cafe Theatre](http://www.wowcafe.org/). As
a creation, it is deeply married to a specific place in a way that is rarely
encountered in business. To stage the production at all, the performers had to
earn sufficient sweat equity in the collective by working on other artists’
shows. Off the top of my head, of the many people I know working on startups,
I can’t think of anyone with that sort of deep commitment to a specific
community in a specific place. If I did encounter such a startup, though, I’d
probably be shouting at passing cars about it.

#### Talk to the audience

The fourth wall is a convention that has long been suspect within the
theatrical tradition. Even though we’re standing up here shouting at the top
of our lungs, we’re supposed to pretend that no one’s watching? Shakespeare
did some magical things with his asides and soliloquies, and he was hardly the
first one.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pdj6LH-hvsQ

The Girl from Bare Cove has a narrator who speaks directly to the audience and
brings them into a family torn apart by a mysterious violence, sharing that
deeply personal viewpoint. But even before the audience filed in, the makers
of The Girl from Bare Cove were reaching out to their audience, challenging
them to get behind this production via a [Kickstarter
campaign](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/466720292/the-girl-from-bare-
cove-a-folk-opera). Thankfully they did, and now audiences were able to
experience this unique night of folk opera.

Tech nerds have historically had a very hard time with engaging with their
supposed markets. Steve Blank has done the community a huge service by
formalizing an executable framework for actually figuring out what people want
to buy, [customer development](http://steveblank.com/category/customer-
development/). Despite the amount of popularity these principles have achieved
in recent years, there is still always going to be a sense in which every
startup fails because it fails to produce a product that enough people want to
buy for enough money. Obviously this is harder to do than it is to say.

One solution that has more of a history than in business is co-creation. While
the concept has [become a bit more fashionable
recently](http://www.forbes.com/sites/ashoka/2014/02/04/why-co-creation-is-
the-future-for-all-of-us/), its roots in the arts are far deeper. Think of
commissions, site specific pieces, adaptations of shows to local tastes.
Improv theater is all about meeting people where they are, making something on
the spot based on what they offer and respond to. The performers of
Problem/Solution welcomed the creative contributions of the audience into the
production, starting as early as the RSVP form! No one audiences experience of
the production could be the same as any other; the audience simply has too
many different choices, too much free will for everything to be experienced in
the exact same way more than once.

Can you imagine a tech company with that radical of an approach to its
development? On the surface, it sounds like the pitches of so many user-
generated, crowd-sourced, open-source startups. There is an element of
customer/business co-creation there, I think it’s often quite constrained and
narrow. Users are encouraged to create the inventory of content that the
startup can’t afford to make itself. Users are encouraged to find the bugs
that the startup can’t afford to test for. Users are encouraged to bring in
the new users that the startup can’t afford to find and persuade.

In my mind, a startup looking to truly co-create itself with its users would
take a far broader view. It would be in a dialogue with its whole community,
and not just its target demographics. I think that it’s likely that such a
startup would likely come from a group of people who are already friends, who
have their own well-founded sense of community in the small. As [I’ve said
before](https://medium.com/@jeffksmithjr/40bf118a2845), I think [B
Corps](https://www.bcorporation.net/) are a nice step in establishing some
solid guiding principles, but they’re just a start. A company built with the
authenticity and passion of your average independent theatrical production
would probably be pretty amazing. Engineering hiring woes? These guys would
not have them. People would be running campaigns just to get an internship at
such a company.

### Steps, baby or otherwise

This post has turned out much more aspirational and utopian than I had
initially planned. What can I say? Interesting art has that sort of effect on
me. Let’s bring things back down to earth. What am I really getting at? Here’s
the recap:

> _1\. _**_Do the difficult with friends. _**_You wouldn’t/shouldn’t have a
baby with a stranger, so why would you build a startup with one?_

> _2\. _**_Be some place, not every place. _**_You don’t really live on the
internet and neither do your customers._

> _3\. _**_Talk to the audience. _**_Your customers are there for a reason;
you owe it to them to understand why and have that influence the direction of
your company._
