# Programming with Purpose

### The responsibilities of 21st century developers

* * *

The rising power of software developers in our society is a strange and
momentous event. On one level, I find this nothing but a positive.
Programmers, at their best, are people who spend an enormous amount of their
working (and non-working) time attempting to build tools that will outlive
their efforts, that are structured and documented for future extension. They
want to build the future and care very much about _how_ it’s built. Most
importantly to me personally, programmers leave the door pretty wide open for
people of any background to come join in the fun.

But CS is not PoliSci. Or philosophy. Or history. Your average programmer is
deeply apolitical.

For a time, that was totally fine, but I think that time is passing right
before our eyes. With stagnant to declining employment prospects for many
professions, technology-fueled wealth concentration, and an-ever more
automated life, we who code are having a real impact on the world around us.
Not that many of us intend to have an impact, though, except in the very
narrow Jobsian sense of making a dent in the universe. Most of the startup
world is solidly focused on [the problems of being twenty years old with cash
on hand](http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2013/05/27/130527fa_fact_packer).

Again, I would say that this is okay, to a point. A developer is not a doctor,
a teacher, or a firefighter. We build things that people want enough to pay
for them. There’s no shame in this anymore than there is in being a truck
driver, grocer, or garbage man. We provide a service (SaaS pun only slightly
intended).

## Doing more

But anyone who’s been paying attention lately has recognized that programmers
can have a massive impact on the world. Hell, you don’t even really need to be
a true dev to make a huge difference in the world. Most Valley interns could
code circles around Edward Snowden, but he still fundamentally altered the
nature of the American conversation around governmental surveillance and
personal privacy. Want a more feel-good example? Fine, take Salamn Khan who,
while admittedly a fair programmer, changed global education with little more
than YouTube and effort.

These examples and many more make me think that developers can have a
meaningful positive impact on the world around them. If the software community
had an Uncle Ben, he’d have already sat us down and talked us through the
relationship of power to responsibility. But we don’t have an uncle, so we’re
finding our way, more or less on our own.

## Bs are better than Cs

One of the most exciting developments in this space has been
[B-Corps](https://www.bcorporation.net/). They’re a novel idea very much born
out of many of the same social trends driving tech startups. Briefly, they’re
businesses with a broader mission, a double bottom line. But B-Corps are very
much not limited to just technology-centric businesses like
[Etsy](https://blog.etsy.com/news/2012/etsy-joins-the-b-corporation-movement/)
or very image-aware ones like [Warby Parker](http://www.warbyparker.com/do-
good#good-company). All sorts of companies selling things ranging from [ice
cream](http://www.benjerry.com/about-us/b-corp) to [hiking
gear](http://www.patagonia.com/us/patagonia.go?assetid=68413) are finding
benefit in putting their money where their mouth is and signing on to have a
positive impact in their communities.

B-Corps are certainly not trivial to pull off, as [a recent post here on
Medium](https://medium.com/p/99b92d849f6b) describes. But I think that all
sorts of startups pursuing [frighteningly ambitious
ideas](http://paulgraham.com/ambitious.html) could absolutely take on the
challenge of building the next great B-Corp. I would love to see the day when
hot Y-Combinator startups touted their devotion to improving their communities
as much as they currently trumpet their dedication to the ethos of open-source
software.

Similarly, I could totally see a B-Corp accelerator being tremendously
successful due to the enormous positive selection bias it would benefit from.
[Paul Orlando](http://startupsunplugged.com/)’s [recent
book](https://leanpub.com/StartupSacrilege) proposes that the way forwards for
accelerators are various species of specialist accelerators that play upon the
strength of their communities. This isn’t just a proposal, though. Paul and
[Steven Forte](http://www.stephenforte.net/default.aspx)’s [latest demo
day](http://www.stephenforte.net/AcceleratorHK+Cohort+2+Demo+Day.aspx) for
their AcceleratorHK cohort was hosted at just such a community minded place,
[the Good Lab](http://goodlab.hk/).

## Free as in beer

The astute reader probably was waiting for me to address the big elephant in
the room, open source software. Haven’t programmers been pouring their hearts
and souls into code for the benefit of humanity for years? Linux, Apache,
Python, Git-the list goes on ad-infinitum. GitHub is a nearly infinite
respository of free code for anyone and everyone to use as they see fit. So
we’re doing our part, right?

I give that a big maybe. From my experiences with governments, non-profits,
and just communities, they need the gratis sort of free code a lot more than
they need the libre sort of free code. My feeling is that this situation is
getting even more acute. The software job market is [hot](http://toromon.com
/new-new-york.html). Organizations with missions but not massive equity grants
must be having a hard time finding sharp devs to come and take up their
impactful but not profitable work. I mean, even Obama couldn’t find decent
devs to write the website for his signature bit of legistation. Tough times
indeed.

So, if your asynchronous tweet processing distributed queue project doesn’t
count as coding for the common good, what does? Here’s a few suggestions:

### [Code for America](http://codeforamerica.org/)

There’s lots of ways to positively influence your community by, you know,
literally working on its behalf. Want a specific recommendation? Try [the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau](http://www.consumerfinance.gov/). They
have a great mission and some real focus on how to use software to make it
happen.

### Teach what you know

Another exciting route that a lot of people are talking about is teaching
software development. In particular, you can go into high schools, work with
underrepresented groups, and try to give kids a powerful skill to address the
21st century with. My recommendation in this category is
[TEALS](http://www.tealsk12.org/), but a minute of googling can turn up tons
more.

### Build better

If it wasn’t clear from my discussion of B-Corps above, my heart is definitely
in this category. Having spent much of my adult life in the startup world, I
know that so many startup people are optimists, makers, and self-starters. We
get up every morning to go out and hack away at something that wasn’t even
possible before.

People who are willing to take on [space flight](http://www.spacex.com/),
[sequencing the human
genome](https://www.lifetechnologies.com/us/en/home/brands/ion-torrent.html),
and [solar energy](https://joinmosaic.com/) can absolutely take on the
challenge of building a better model for a business than [a vampire squid on
the face of humanity](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-great-
american-bubble-machine-20100405). We can help people [make their dreams into
reality](https://www.kickstarter.com/). So what if some of those dreams are
about cell phone accessories? The modern startup community is [building the
tools](http://theleanstartup.com/) that will allow all sorts of organizations
to bloom. But it is absolutely incumbent upon us to use those tools to help
serve the communities we find ourselves in and the communities we reach around
the world through the power of the internet.

* * *

Personally, I’m still coming to grips with what it means to me to be a
developer who contributes through his code. Having talked through some of the
ways that the tech and startups communities are having an impact, I’m still
unsure of what this means for me.
