#  Why Intent Media

My [previous post on New York startups](http://toromon.com/new-new-york.html)
left out one big topic: who did I choose to work with and why? This post is
meant to address those questions, but I also want to talk about all of the
other ways that companies can get recruiting right or wrong, based on my
(admittedly limited) experience as an engineer who has talked to his fair
share of companies.

## assumptions

I'm going to go out on a limb in this scenario and assume that you're good at
what you do. In fact, you're good enough to have choices, but maybe not so
good that you have already made all the money that you will ever need. I want
to mostly focus on that sweet spot of someone who is looking for a great
company and might deserve to get into one. I think that covers a lot of folks
and definitely most of the folks that hiring teams are targeting.

## dating employers

I think the process of dating potential future employers is solidly weird. It
reminds me of my days running men's recruitment for the several thousand
person Greek system at [my undergrad school](http://www.bradley.edu/). This
was mostly an educational responsibility, trying to convince packs of unruly
frat boys to act in ways that were in our mutual interest.

The best simple summary of the process we ever came up with was:

> It's dudes dating dudes.

In the largely heternormative [1] environment of a fraternity, this model is
surprising enough to stick in a guy's brain while still nudging him towards
thinking about just how challenging this problem is. [2]

### both sides of the table

The dating model implies one thing right off the bat: this is a two-sided
negotiation. The frat is trying to find the guys it wants _and_ trying to get
those guys to want them.

The same is true in the employment recruitment, of course. I think many of the
issues that come in tech recruitment stem from questionable choices that
privilege one of these two sides over the other. I think getting this balance
right is hugely challenging.

## the girls (not a lena dunham production)

So, similar to my [post on CS degrees](http://toromon.com/degrees.html) I'm
going to group some common behaviors into three archetypes.

  * Debby Desperate-She _sooo_ needs to hire a bunch of engineers, like right now. The open reqs are just piling up, and she can't even come close to finding good candidates for most of them.
  * Patty Princess-Obviously, she's the best place in this or any other universe for an engineer to work. Nominally, she is hiring, but only if you're one of the chosen few. You better want it enough to earn it, bub.
  * Maddy Mature-She cares a lot about the engineers she hires, but she also understands the math of fish in the sea. She just wants to hire well, but she knows that puts some responsibilities on her plate.

### debby

Why is Debby so desperate? Well, often, for really good reasons, like the
business is roaring along and growing like crazy. Of course, if she can't hire
well, that business might not be roaring along forever. Certainly, in a market
as hot as New York, part of her frenzy might just be a sort of fight-or-flight
reaction to the tremendous competition.

But there are real warning signs in her behavior. Here are a couple that I've
seen from one distance or another:

  * Her technical evaluation is bad. This can actually come in two flavors. In the first one, the technical evaluation is so cursory, she still doesn't even know if you can say, make a class. In the second one, the technical evaluation is more detailed, but still deeply flawed. This usually takes the form of the seemingly endless trivia quiz. It ranges over good things to know, largely irrelevant things, and in between. What makes it useless is that it's largely just googleable facts, that at best, can be used as a sort of proxy for previous experience.
  * She rushes through the cultural/social fit aspect of things. When a company gets crazy busy, it can make a sort of naive sense to not take up too much of busy engineers and managers' time. But when it gets to the point of first interviews being last interviews and making on the spot offers, things have gone too far.
  * She simply forgets to address the competitive questions, perhaps assuming that you're not interviewing anywhere else. Outside of a few empty phrases like "startup culture" and "agile development", she gives you very little to allow you to assess the community of people she's proposing you join.
  * She tries to really cram you, a square peg expert, into her round hole position. It's all on the tech team anyway, right? So what's the big difference?

Obviously, you shouldn't date Debby too long. It's not that she's a bad person
or that any of her problems are insoluble. But that Newton guy made some solid
points; organizations in motion tend to stay that way. If this chaos is how
new members are selected for the team, there are going to be all sorts of
problems stemming from that. Teams are not going to get along, possibly
because they have a lot of deadweight, or maybe just because no one is on the
same page about anything that matters.

Sometimes is less is simply less, and I would say that Debby's approach is
just not doing a thorough enough job of building her company in an intelligent
and reasoned way.

### patty

Well, if Debby is a mess, then her exact opposite, Patty, must be in great
shape, then, right? Um, nope.

You see, Patty is a princess, an unassailable pinnacle of perfection.
Engineers should be ready to pass a Joker-style pool queue tryout process, if
they want a shot. The canonical example of this girl is [the search engine who
shall not be named](http://harrypotter.wikia.com/wiki/Tom_Riddle), but there
are lots of others. They don't even have to be world famous. They just have to
have arbitrary requirements and an irrational devotion to them.

Warning signs? Where do I begin?

  * Her technical evaluation resembles a thesis defense at gunpoint, without the benefit of actually having done a thesis first. Don't think that she won't stoop to trivia as well. Sometimes, she loves to pull out obscure C++ nonsense.
  * In some of here incarnations she only hires people with CS degrees [3] , often only from some schools. Obviously this gets harder the bigger a company gets, but don't think that there aren't plenty of Patty's out there who are roundfiling any resume that doesn't have Stanford or MIT on it. Their engineers are just that elite.
  * Similarly, she can be very, very concerned about your previous job titles (or research publications). She wants to know that you were born golden. After all, as [Princess Mayer once said](http://gawker.com/5162532/marissa-mayer-googles-biggest-failure) , "Good students are good at all things." Sort of like [Kim Jong Il](https://sites.google.com/site/sophieinnorthkorea/home).
  * It's all about her. You do not get to meet the whole team, maybe not even your direct supervisor. If you do get to meet the relevant people, don't think that there's going to be time for _you_ to ask questions. That's her time, not yours.
  * She makes implicit or explicit statements that amount to, "We have enough money to make sure that you want to work for us."

The thing is, your friends and family might be impressed if you land this ice
princess. It will be viewed as an achievement of sorts, as it should be.
Sorta.

The problem is that, well, you might find out that Patty is a bitch. You might
in fact be legitimately miserable working for her. The lack of respect she
displayed in the interview process might continue (Newton again). Moreover the
list of things that you don't know you don't know is huge and scary. As a
career startupper, I believe that rational risk-taking is absolutely essential
in a career, but the risks that Patty asks you to take are just unreasonable.

At the heart of it, I'd say that Patty's problem is that she just does not
have a valid view of the universe. Engineers today can be so much more than
hangers-on to someone else's greatness. Her fundamental lack of respect for
the people who do her work is just troubling.

## maddy

We all know our Goldilocks. This is the time we get to the porridge that is
"just right". So what is just right?

Well, Maddy looks at these other two girls and just doesn't get what they're
thinking. She sees two major facts staring her in the face every day:

>   1. The next N engineers she hires are going to be hugely important for the
future of her company.

>   2. Good engineers have good choices.

This adds up to her taking the following approach towards hiring.

  * Her technical evaluation is thorough, but fair. What does this mean? It means that she tests for specific skills, used on the job. This doesn't mean language trivia. She's largely language agnostic, at least during the evaluation process. But she does try to really figure out who can and can't ship working code.
  * Similarly, she doesn't obsess over your resume. What school you went to, what you studied, where you went after-all these things are relevant inputs into a holistic evaluation process. But she's hiring for an engineer, not a piece of paper. She's far more concerned with other things like your ability and your attitude.
  * She cares a great deal about who you are and how you work. Moreover, she expects you to care about who your potential coworkers are and how they work. So she makes sure that both sides get a real chance to understand each other. Moreover, she's quite public about what she's all about (and what she's not). This gives you the chance to evaluate her, on your own time, from a distance, even using some third party information to verify your assumptions (e.g. a [Crain's Best Places to Work award](http://www.crainsnewyork.com/features/best-places-to-work)).

At it's simplest level, I think Maddy Mature's process can be summed up as the
reasonable person's approach to entering into a significant long-term
relationship.

> She's courting, not dating.

As a former frat boy and current happy husband, I think the difference between
the two is stark. People who are courting privilege honesty and sincerity
above all else. They're looking for people they can trust with their life. And
Maddy? She's a keeper; she's the one you want to bring home to mom and dad.

### my maddy

If you've read this much already, you probably already know that I found my
Maddy, [Intent Media](http://www.intentmedia.com/about). As a company, it is
110% of the ideal I described above. Rather than recap our
[values](http://www.intentmedia.com/about) , let me give a simple example.

### the bad functional programmer

At another company, I once had a barely technical manager take apart some of
my code to show how a functional programming approach would be so much more
"efficient". Readers of this blog will know, that I love functional
programming, but this particular manager was emphatic that good code always
used list comprehensions, map, reduce, and filter, without regard to the
specifics of the situation. In fact, this manager's solution was tremendously
memory inefficient and slower, big problems for the embedded device we were
developing for. Ultimately, his motivations for religious dogmatism around FP
were all about fashion and not a bit about productivity.

### the good functional programmer

Contrast this with my discussion of FP when interviewing with Intent Media.
We:

>   1. wrote some real code to solve the problem using recursion

>   2. evaluated alternatives

>   3. considered the benefits _and_ drawbacks of a functional approach

>   4. went ahead and implemented an imperative approach

Throughout this process, there was a fair and respectful back-and-forth. No
trivia or tricks; just a transparent search for a solution to the problem
posed.

### the etc.

Beyond this simple example, I'd point out that people at IM _are_ doing some
great stuff with FP (in Clojure!). But that's just the tip of the iceberg. A
culture that values its candidates usually values its employees. It's not just
engineers, though. Designers, sales folks, dogs-everyone at IM is valued for
who they are and what they bring to the table. This is the big upside to doing
a thorough evaluation process: everyone who is in the room belongs in the
room. Not just because they're smart and capable, but because they _want_ to
be in the room. If you've never seen that, let me assure you, it's just as
great as it sounds.

* * *

[1]

I don't mean to imply that the Greek community was in any sense homophobic at
the time I was involved with it. I knew openly gay Greeks and even the
occasional openly gay Greek couple. I'm just trying to accurately convey the
strong social norms of a bunch of 20 year olds whose social life revolved
around doing keg stands.

[2]

It also encourages him to shower.

[3]

Again, I'm actually in favor of developers studying
[CS](http://toromon.com/degrees.html) , but my enthusiasm has limits.
Excessive credentialism and arbitrary requirements just drive me batty. Every
time I hear someone treat something like a CS degree as mandatory, I'm always
reminded of the recruiters who want to know how many years of RoR experience
DHH has.
